             INDIA RANKINGS 2023




NATIONAL INSTITUTIONAL RANKING FRAMEWORK

Methodology for Ranking of Academic Institutions in India

        (RANKING METRICS FOR OVERALL)




Ministry of Human Resource Development
1. Salient Features



   1.1 Methodology is based on developing a set of metrics for ranking of academic
       institutions, based on the parameters agreed upon by the core committee.

   1.2 These parameters are organized into five broad heads, and have been further
       elaborated into suitable sub-heads. Each broad head has an overall weight
       assigned to it. Within each head, the various sub-heads also have an
       appropriate weight distribution.

   1.3 An attempt is also made to identify the relevant data needed to suitably
       measure the performance score under each sub-head. Emphasis here is on
       identifying data that the institution can easily provide or is easy to obtain from
       third party sources and easily verifiable, where verification is needed. This is
       important in the interest of transparency.

   1.4 A suitable metric is then proposed based on this data, which computes a score
       under each sub-head. The sub-head scores are then added to obtain scores for
       each individual head. The overall score is computed based on the weights allotted
       to each head. The overall score can take a maximum value of 100.
   1.5 The institutions can then be rank-ordered based on their scores.


   2. Eligibility for Overall and Discipline Specific Rankings

   2.1 Learning from our experience of the earlier ranking excercises, it is proposed
       to have the following different ways of Ranking.

        (i)     This year, all candidate institutions, independent of their discipline or
                nature (comprehensive or otherwise) will be given overall rank1, if they
                satisfy the criteria that they have a total of atleast 1000 student intake
                or enrolled students in UG and PG programs.




1 The parameters have been chosen in such a manner that these are equally relevant for
various kinds of educational institutions. Data format is designed to ensure that the
diversity of disciplines and their separate character are accounted for.
        (ii) Institutions will also be given a discipline specific rank as relevant.

        (iii) Highly focussed institutions with a single main discipline (Engineering,
        Medical, Law, Management, Pharmacy, Architecture or UG degree colleges in
        Arts, Science and Commerce, etc.) with less than 1000 total sanctioned
        approved intake or enrolled students will be given only a discipline specific
        rank.
        (iv) Schools or Departments of Universities or Institutions (such as
        Architecture, Engineering, Law Faculty, Management Departments, Pharmacy
        etc.) will have to register separately and provide additional data (in the format)
        pertaining to the respective School or Department, if they desire to be included
        in the discipline specific ranking list. All institutions should seriously consider
        this option, if they wish to position their important Faculties/Schools at the
        national level. Only options available on the registration portal will be

        considered for discipline specific rankings2.


        (v) Undergraduate Teaching institutions (including degree colleges affiliated to
        a university) are also invited to participate.



2 If an engineering school of a University consists of a single engineering discipline with
very few students, they would not be eligible for ranking even under the discipline specific
category. Thus, if the engineering faculty of a University has only the Department of
Electronics Engineering as its Engineering School, it need not apply for a separate discipline
specific ranking under the engineering category.
   (vi) Discipline specific ranks will be announced only in those disciplines where
   a significant number of institutions offer themselves for ranking, and the List
   includes some of the prominent institutions in that discipline, with an
   acceptable ranking score. The final decision on ranking of a discipline will
   therefore be decided by NIRF after analysing the data.


   (vii) Open Universities and Affiliating Universities (whether State or Centre
   approved/funded) will not be considered for ranking. However, if these
   universities have a teaching or research campus of their own, they are welcome
   to participate with data pertaining only to their physical campuses. Data
   pertaining to their function as open or affiliating universities cannot be
   included in the submitted data.


   (viii) Rankings will be considered only for those institutions that have graduated
   at least three batches of students in full time UG or PG programs, where the
   duration is not less than three years for the UG programs and two years for the
   PG programs.


2.2 While score computations for the parameters are similar for both kinds of
   rankings (i.e., overall or discipline specific) on most counts, the weights are
   somewhat different on a few parameters, to take into account discipline
   specific issues.
3. Data Collection

3.1 In view of the absence of a reliable and comprehensive third-party Data-Base
   that could supply all relevant information (as needed for computing the said
   scores), it is imperative that the institutions that are desirous of participating
   in the ranking exercise, supply the data in the given format that is being made
   available on the NIRF portal, before the last date specified for this purpose. The
   deadlines will be separately announced on the NIRF portal.


3.2 It is required that the institutions upload the submitted data also on their own,
   publicly visible website in the interest of transparency. The access to this data
   should be through a prominent link named NIRF in the homepage itself.It is
   mandatory that institutions should host the data submitted for India Rankings
   2023 on their website post the final submission and they should also provide
   an email address where they would receive comments and feedback.
   Institutions should pro-actively and objectively examine the comments and
   feedback received to effect corrections, if so warranted (within the time slot to
   be announced by NIRF on its website). All institutions have to mandatory host
   data submitted for India Rankings 2023 for a period of three years.




3.3 Institutions who fail to post the data submitted to NIRF on their own websites (as
   indicated in 3.2), or those who do not have institution website, will be given
   intial notice and afterwards an appropriate action will be taken.


3.4 NIRF has been empowered to take up physical checks on the institution records
   and audited accounts where needed, to ensure that the principles of ethical
   behaviour are being adhered to. In case an institution is approached for
   carrying out any physical check, they are expected to co-operate. Non-
   cooperation may lead to debarring the institution from participation in the
   ranking exercise.
3.5 For some of the parameters (like Research, Patents etc.) the data will be populated
   from internationally available Data Bases. However, NIRF reserves the right not to
   use the data from any of these sources or include other sources, if so warranted.
   NIRF shall directly access data from these resources, or seek help from the
   resource publishers, as necessary.

3.6 NIRF also reserves the right to modify any of the metrics if it deems fit to do so
   in the interest of rationalisation necessitated by the exigencies or the nature of
   the data encountered. Any changes so made will be notified at the time of
   announcing the rankings.


3.7 If any participating institution is found sending promotional/canvassing emails
   during the Ranking Exercise, then all the votes received in the survey will be
   made zero.
4. Implementation Details

4.1 As in the previous year, the National Board of Accreditation (NBA) will continue
   to be the Ranking Agency on behalf of NIRF for 2023.


4.2 NIRF shall invite institutions interested to participate in the ranking exercise to
   register on the NIRF portal. The data should be submitted on an on-line facility
   created for this purpose.


4.3 NIRF, by itself or with the help of other suitably identified partner agencies will
   also undertake authentication of data, wherever felt necessary, and where
   feasible.


4.4 NIRF will extract the relevant information from this data and through software,
   compute the various metrics and rank institutions based on this data. This
   process is expected to be completed in about 3 months, and rankings published
   on the first Monday of April 2023.


5. Errors and Correction Policy

5.1 All efforts will be made to display the raw data on the NIRF website after due
   processing by NIRF for cross-checking by the institution. This is the data on
   which rankings would be finally computed. It will be the Institution’s
   responsibility to ensure that the data published by NIRF accurately reflects the
   submissions by it. The institution will also be invited to check out the data
   supplied by or taken from third sources. If the Institution does not give any
   comments or feedback within a specified period on the displayed data, it will
   be assumed that this data is accurate. No petitions for corrections will be
   accepted after the declared deadline, or after the rankings have been
   announced.


5.2 It is the responsibility of the Nodal officer to ensure that the data updated
   during data verification is correct. And if data updated is incorrect, Nodal
   Officer should send an email before rankings are announced. No such
   complaints will be entertained after the release of ranks.


5.3 If it is found that an institution has deliberately manipulated the submitted
   data, causing erroneous rankings, NIRF will remove the institution from the
   ranking list and future rankings and publish a suitable note to this effect.
               Summary of Ranking Parameters and Weightages- 2023
                                   (Overall)
Sr. No.                   Parameter                      Marks    Weightage

  1       Teaching, Learning & Resources                  100       0.30
  2       Research and Professional Practice              100       0.30
  3       Graduation Outcomes                             100       0.20
  4       Outreach and Inclusivity                        100       0.10
  5       Perception                                      100       0.10
 S.No.                                Parameters                                  Marks
 1.      Teaching, Learning & Resources (TLR)                                     100
         Ranking weight: 0.30
            A. Student Strength including Doctoral Students(SS): 20 marks
            B. Faculty-student ratio with emphasis on permanent faculty (FSR):
               25 marks
            C. Combined metric for Faculty with PhD (or equivalent) and
               Experience (FQE): 20 marks
            D. Financial Resources and their Utilisation (FRU): 20 marks
            E. Online Education: Online Completion of Syllabus & Exams and
               Swayam (OE): 15 marks

 2.      Research and Professional Practice (RP)                                  100
         Ranking weight: 0.30
            A. Combined metric for Publications (PU): 35 marks
            B. Combined metric for Quality of Publications (QP): 35 marks
            C. IPR and Patents: Published and Granted (IPR): 15 marks
            D. Footprint of Projects and Professional Practice (FPPP): 15 marks

 3.      Graduation Outcomes (GO)                                                 100
         Ranking weight: 0.20
            A. Metric for University Examinations(GUE): 60 marks
            B. Metric for Number of Ph.D. Students Graduated (GPHD):
               40 marks

 4.      Outreach and Inclusivity (OI)                                            100
         Ranking weight: 0.10
            A. Percentage of Students from Other States/Countries (Region
               Diversity RD): 30 marks
            B. Percentage of Women (Women Diversity WD): 30 marks
            C. Economically and Socially Challenged Students (ESCS):
               20 marks
            D. Facilities for Physically Challenged Students (PCS): 20 marks

 5.      Perception (PR)*                                                         100
         Ranking weight: 0.10
            A. Peer Perception: Academic Peers and Employers (PR): 100
               marks


*However for universities in the PR parameter, 70% weight was given to Peer Perception and
30% to Accreditation.
1. Teaching, Learning & Resources (TLR): 100 marks
  •   Ranking weight: 0.30

  •   Overall Assessment Metric:

      TLR = SS (20) + FSR (25) + FQE (20) + FRU (20) + OE (15)

  •   Component metrics based on :

         A. Student Strength including Ph.D. Students: SS
         B. Faculty-Student Ratio with emphasis on permanent faculty: FSR
         C. Combined metric for Faculty with PhD (or equivalent) and Experience:
            FQE
         D. Financial Resources and Their Utilisation: FRU
         E. Online Education: Online Completion of Syllabus & Exams and Swayam:
            OE
A. Student Strength including Ph.D. students (SS): 20 Marks

  •   SS = f(NT, NE) × 15 + f(NP) × 5


  •   The functions f(NT ,NE) and f(Np) are functions to be determined by NIRF.
  •   NT: Total sanctioned approved intake in the institution considering all UG and PG
      programs of the institution.
  •   NE: Total number of students enrolled in the institution considering all UG and PG
      programs of the institution.
  •   Np = Total number of students enrolled for the doctoral program till previous
      academic year.


  •   Primary Data: To be provided in a prescribed Format.
B. Faculty-Student Ratio with emphasis on permanent faculty (FSR): 25 marks

   •   FSR = 25 × [15 × (F/N)]

   •   N =NT+ Np

   •   F: Full time regular faculty in the institution in the previous year.

   •   Regular appointment means Faculty on Full time basis. Faculty on contract basis/ad-
       hoc basis will be considered if the concerned faculty has taught in both the semesters
       of academic year 2021-22.

   •   Faculty members with Ph.D. and Masters degree will be considered and counted here.
       Faculty member with a Bachelor’s degree will not be counted.


   •   Expected ratio is 1:15 to score maximum marks.

   •   For F/N < 1: 50, FSR will be set to zero.




   •   Primary Data: Faculty List to be provided in the Prescribed Format.
C. Combined Metric for Faculty with PhD (or equivalent) and Experience (FQE): 20 marks

    •   FQ = 10 × (FRA/95) , FRA < 95%;

    •   FQ = 10, FRA ≥ 95%.


    •   Here FRA is the percentage of Faculty with Ph.D. (or equivalent qualification) with respect
        to the total no. of faculty required or actual faculty whichever is higher, in the previous
        year.

.

        F1=Fraction with Experience up to 8 years;

        F2= Fraction with Experience between 8+ to 15years;

        F3=Fraction with Experience > 15 years.



        FE = 3min(3F1, 1) + 3 min(3F2, 1) + 4 min(3F3, 1)

        Rationale: Full marks for a ratio of 1:1:1



    •   FQE = FQ + FE



    •   Primary Data: Faculty List in the Prescribed Format.
D: Financial Resources and their Utilisation (FRU): 20 Marks

   •   FRU = 5×f(BC) + 15×f(BO)

   •   BC: Average Annual Capital Expenditure per student for the previous three years.
       (Excluding expenditure on construction of new buildings)

   •   BO: Average Annual Operational (or Recurring) Expenditure per student for
       the previous three years. (Excluding maintenance of hostels and allied
       services)



   •   Primary Data: Figures in prescribed format for each.
E: Online Education: Online Completion of Syllabus & Exams and Swayam (OE): 15
   marks

   •   OE = f(OE)
2.Research and Professional Practice (RP): 100 marks
  •   Ranking weight: 0.30

  •   Overall Assessment Metric:

      RP = PU(35) + QP(35) + IPR(15) + FPPP(15)

  •   The component metrics explained on following pages.



  A. Combined Metric for Publications: PU
  B. Combined Metric for Quality of Publications: QP
  C. IPR and Patents: Published and Granted: IPR
  D. Footprint of Projects, Professional Practice and Executive
     Development Programs: FPPP
A.Combined metric for Publications (PU): 35 marks

   •   PU = 35 × f(P/FRQ)


   •   P is weighted number of publications as acertained from suitable third party sources.
   •   FRQ is the maximum of nominal number of faculty members as calculated on the basis
       of a required FSR of 1:15 or the available faculty in the institution.
   •   Sources: Third party sources.
B.Combined metric for Quality of Publications (QP): 35 Marks


   •   QP = 20 × f (CC/FRQ) + 15× f (TOP25P/P)


   •   Here CC is Total Citation Count over previous three years.
   •   P is as computed for PU.
   •   TOP25P: Number of citations in top 25 percentile averaged over the previous three
       years.

   •   FRQ is the maximum of nominal number of faculty members as calculated on the basis
       of a required FSR of 1:15 or the available faculty in the institution.

   •   Primary Data: Third Party Sources.
C. IPR and Patents: Patents Published & Granted (IPR): 15 marks

       IPR = IPG + IPP

       IPG = 10× f (PG)

   •   PG is the number of patents granted over the previous three years.


       IPP = 5 × f (PP)
   •   PP: No. of patents published over the previous three years.

   •   Primary Data: Third Party Sources
D. Footprint of Projects, Professional Practice and Executive Development Programs
/Management Development Programs (FPPP): 15 marks

   •   FPPP = FPR + FPC + EDP/MDP

   •   FPR = 5 × f(RF)

   •   RF is the average annual research funding earnings (amount received in rupees) at
       institute level in previous three years.


   •   FPC =5 × f(CF)

   •   CF is the average annual consultancy amount (amount actually received in rupees)
       at institute level in previous three years.

   •   EDP/MDP = 5 × f(EP)

   •   EP = Average annual earnings from Executive Development Programs/Management
       Development Programs in previous three years.

   •   Primary Data: To be provided by the institution in prescribed format.
3. Graduation Outcome (GO):100 marks

  •   Ranking weight: 0.20

  •   Overall Assessment Metric:

  •   GO = GUE(60) +GPHD(40)

  •   The component metrics are explained on the following pages:


      A. Metric for University Examinations: GUE
      B. Metric for Number of Ph.D. Students Graduated: GPHD
A. Metric for University Examinations (GUE): 60 Marks

   •   GUE = 60 × min [(Ng/80), 1]



   •   Ng is the percentage of Students (as a fraction of the approved intake),
       averaged over the previous three years, passing the respective university
       examinations in stipulated time for the program in which enrolled.



   •   Primary Data: To be provided in a prescribed format
B. Metric for Number of Ph.D Students Graduated (GPHD): 40 Marks

   •   GPHD = 40 × f(Nphd)


   •   Nphd = Average number of Ph.D students graduated (awarded Ph.D) over the
       previous three years.



   •   Primary Data: Number of graduating Ph.D. Students as reflected in the
       approved Annual Report/Convocation Report to be provided in the prescribed
       format.
4. Outreach and Inclusivity (OI): 100 marks
  •   Ranking weight: 0.10

  •   Overall Assessment Metric: OI = RD(30) + WD(30) +ESCS(20) + PCS(20)

  •   The component metrics are explained on following pages:

      A. Percentage of Students from Other States/ Countries (Region Diversity): RD
      B. Percentage of Women (Women Diversity): WD
      C. Economically and Socially Challenged Students: ESCS
      D. Facilities for Physically Challenged Students: PCS
A. Percentage of Students from Other States/ Countries (Region Diversity RD): 30 marks

  RD = 25 × fraction of total students enrolled from other states + 5 × fraction of
  students enrolled from other countries



  Primary Data: To be provided in the prescribed format.
B. Percentage of Women (Women Diversity WD): 30 marks

   •   WD = 15 × (NWS/50) + 15 × (NWF/20)



   •   NWS are the percentage of Women students.

   •   NWF are the percentage of Women Faculty including women members in senior
       administrative positions, such as Heads of Departments, Deans or Institute Heads.

   •   Expectation: 50% women students and 20% women faculty.



   •   Primary Data: To be provided in the prescribed format.
C. Economically and Socially Challenged Students (ESCS) : 20 marks



   •   ESCS = 20 × f(Nesc)

   •   Nesc is the percentage of students being provided full tuition fee rembursement by the
       institution to pursue their degree programs.

   •   Primary Data: To be provided by the institution in a prescribed format.
D. Facilities for Physically Challenged Students (PCS): 20 marks

   •   PCS = 20 marks, if the Institute provides full facilities for physically
       challenged students, as outlined.

       Else, in proportion to facilities.



   •   Basis: Verifiable Responses to Questions.



   •   Primary Data: To be provided in a prescribed format.
5. Perception (PR) – 100 marks

  •   Ranking weight: 0.1

  •   Overall Assessment Metric: PR = PR(100)

  •   Component metrics are explained in the following pages:

      A. Peer Perception: Employers & Academic Peer: (PR)
A. Peer Perception: Employers & Academic Peer (PR): 100 marks


•   This is to be done through a survey conducted over a large category of Employers,
    Professionals from Reputed Organizations and a large category of academics to
    ascertain their preference for graduates of different institutions.

•   Comprehensive list will be prepared taking into account various sectors, regions, etc.

•   Lists to be updated periodically.
